Propositional Logic deals with the relationships between propositions. The exact definition of a proposition is not possible, but generally, it refers to a potential state of the world that can be either true or false. Examples of propositions include the possibility of rain or the possibility of clouds. It's important to note that a proposition doesn't have to be true; it can also be false, depending on the truth value of another proposition.

In this chapter, we start by examining the syntax rules that establish the language of Propositional Logic. Then, we introduce the concept of a truth assignment, which helps us define the meaning of sentences in Propositional Logic. Next, we provide a systematic approach for evaluating sentences based on a given truth assignment and outline a method for finding truth assignments that satisfy sentences. Finally, we demonstrate how Propositional Logic can be used to formalize Natural Language and Digital Circuits through a series of examples.

### Syntax

In Propositional Logic, we have two types of sentences, simple and compound. Simple sentences are the ones that express a fact about the world. Compound sentences are the ones that are made out of simple sentences and logical relationships.

* **Simple Sentences:** These are often called proposition constants or, sometimes, logical constants.

   > *In what follows, we would write proposition constants as strings of letters, digits, and underscores, which begin only by a small letter.*

* **Compound Sentences:** These are made out of simple sentences and logical relationships.
   - **Negation:** Consists of a negation operator and a simple sentence, called the target. For a statement $p$, its negation is written as:
      $$ \neg p $$
   - **Conjunction:** This is a sequence of sentences separated by occurrences of the $\land$ operator and enclosed by parentheses. The constituent sentences are called *conjuncts*.
      $$ (p \land q) $$
   - **Disjunction:** This is a sequence of sentences separated by occurrences of the $\lor$ operator and enclosed in parentheses. The constituent sentences are called *disjuncts*.
      $$ (p \lor q) $$
   - **Implication:** This one consists of a pair of sentences separated by the $\Rightarrow$ or $\rightarrow$ and enclosed in parentheses. The sentence to the left of the operator is called the antecedent, and the sentence to the right is called the consequent. The implication of $p$ and $q$ is shown below:
      $$ p \rightarrow q $$
   - **Biconditional:** A biconditional is a combination of an implication and a reverse implication:
      $$ p \leftrightarrow q $$

> *Note: The constituent sentences within any compound sentence can be either simple sentences or compound sentences or a mixture of the two.*

#### Operator Precedence

Since more complex compound statements would eventually become ambiguous, we have the following precedence:

1. $\neg$
2. $\land$
3. $\lor$
4. $\rightarrow$
5. $\leftrightarrow$

> *Note: Just because precedence allows us to delete parentheses in some cases does not mean that we can dispense with parentheses entirely. Consider the example shown earlier. Precedence eliminates the ambiguity by dictating that the sentence without parentheses is an implication with a disjunction as antecedent. However, this makes for a problem for those cases when we want to express a disjunction with an implication as a disjunct. In such cases, we must retain at least one pair of parentheses.*

We end the section with two simple definitions that are useful in discussing Propositional Logic. *A propositional vocabulary* is a set of proposition constants. *A propositional language* is the set of all propositional sentences that can be formed from a propositional vocabulary.
### Semantics

The approach to semantics in Logic bears resemblance to that of Algebra. Algebra is not concerned with the real-world meaning of variables; rather, it focuses on the relationships between the values of variables as expressed in equations. Algebraic methods are designed to uphold these relationships, regardless of the interpretation of the variables.

Similarly, Logic does not concern itself with the real-world significance of proposition constants. Instead, it emphasizes the relationships between the truth values of simple sentences and compound sentences that contain them. Like Algebra, logical reasoning methods are detached from the interpretation of proposition constants; what truly matters is the structure and form of the sentences. Although the values assigned to proposition constants are not crucial in the sense just described, we sometimes would like to assign various values to them. Such assignment is called *truth assignment*.

With such truth assignment, we would see that for each compound sentence, there are different results by assigning different truth values.

> *Note: For the value "true," we use 1, while for "false," we use 0.*

* **Negation:**

   | $\phi$ | $\neg\phi$ |
   |-------|------------|
   |   0   |     1      |
   |   1   |     0      |

* **Conjunction:**

   | $\phi$ | $\psi$ | $\phi\land\psi$ |
   |-------|-------|-----------------|
   |   1   |   1   |       1         |
   |   1   |   0   |       0         |
   |   0   |   1   |       0         |
   |   0   |   0   |       0         |

* **Disjunction:**

   | $\phi$ | $\psi$ | $\phi\lor\psi$ |
   |-------|-------|----------------|
   |   1   |   1   |       1        |
   |   1   |   0   |       1        |
   |   0   |   1   |       1        |
   |   0   |   0   |       0        |

* **Implication:**

   | $\phi$ | $\psi$ | $\phi\rightarrow\psi$ |
   |-------|-------|----------------------|
   |   1   |   1   |          1           |
   |   1   |   0   |          0           |
   |   0   |   1   |          1           |
   |   0   |   0   |          1           |

* **Biconditional:**

   | $\phi$ | $\psi$ | $\phi\leftrightarrow\psi$ |
   |-------|-------|--------------------------|
   |   1   |   1   |             1            |
   |   1   |   0   |             0            |
   |   0   |   1   |             0            |
   |   0   |   0   |             1            |
### Evaluation & Satisfaction

**Evaluation** is when we get the truth values of the simple statements and then try to find the truth value of a compound statement made out of those simple ones.

**Satisfaction** is the opposite; we try to find the truth values that would make a statement false or true. In other words, we consider all the possible truth value combinations for the simple sentences in the compound sentence and evaluate each one.

#Mathematical_Logic
