**Satisfaction** is a relationship between specific sentences and specific truth assignments. In Logic, we are usually more interested in properties and relationships of sentences that hold across all truth assignments. In this section, we will look at logical properties such as validity, contingency, and unsatisfiability. Then, we will explore three types of logical relationships between sentences: Logical Entailment, Logical Equivalence, and Logical Consistency.

### Logical Properties

As there are sentences that are true or false, there are sentences that are sometimes true and sometimes false. This leads us to categorize sentences into three types:

* **Valid:** A sentence is **valid** if and only if it is satisfied by every truth assignment.

* **Unsatisfiable:** A sentence is **unsatisfiable** if and only if it is not satisfied by any truth assignment.

* **Contingent:** A sentence is **contingent** if and only if there is some truth assignment that satisfies it and some truth assignment that falsifies it.

> *Note: Valid and unsatisfiable sentences, in some sense, are considered useless because they do not rule out any truth assignment as one accepts, and the other denies all.*

> *Note: For many purposes, it is useful to group valid and contingency into one group called **satisfiable**.

### Logical Equivalence

We say that a sentence $\phi$ is logically equivalent to a sentence $\psi$ if and only if, for every truth assignment that satisfies $\phi$, $\psi$ is also satisfied, and vice versa. One way of determining whether or not two sentences are logically equivalent is to check the truth table for the proposition constants in the language. This is called the truth table method:

1. We form a truth table for the proposition constants and add a column for each of the sentences.
2. Then, we evaluate the two expressions.
3. At the end, we compare the results. If the values for the two sentences are the same in every case, then the two sentences are logically equivalent; otherwise, they are not.

### Logical Entailment

We say that a sentence $\phi$ logically entails a sentence $\psi$, written as ($\phi \vDash \psi$), if and only if a truth assignment that satisfies $\phi$ also satisfies $\psi$. More generally, we say that a set of sentences $\Delta$ logically entails a sentence $\psi$, written as $\Sigma \vDash \psi$, if and only if the truth assignment that satisfies all of the sentences in $\Delta$ also satisfies $\psi$.

> *Note: The relationship of logical entailment is a purely logical one. Even if the premises of a problem do not logically entail the conclusion, this does not mean that the conclusion is necessarily false, even if the premises are true. It just means that it is possible that the conclusion is false.*

As with logical equivalence, we can use truth tables to determine whether or not a set of premises logically entails a possible conclusion by checking the truth table for the proposition constants in the language:

1. We form a truth table for the proposition constants and add a column for the premises and a column for the conclusion.
2. We then evaluate the premises.
3. We evaluate the conclusion.
4. Finally, we compare the results. If every row that satisfies the premises also satisfies the conclusion, then the premises logically entail the conclusion.
### Logical Consistency

A sentence $\phi$ is consistent with a sentence $\psi$ if and only if there is a truth assignment that satisfies both $\phi$ and $\psi$. A sentence $\psi$ is consistent with a set of sentences $\Delta$ if and only if there is a truth assignment that satisfies both $\Delta$ and $\psi.

### Connections Between Properties and Relationships

Before we end this chapter, it is worth noting that there are some strong connections between logical properties like validity and satisfiability and the logical relationships introduced in the preceding sections.

First of all, there is a connection between the logical equivalence of two sentences and the validity of the biconditional sentence built from the two sentences. In particular, we have the following theorem expressing this connection.

**Equivalence Theorem:** A sentence $\phi$ and a sentence $\psi$ are logically equivalent if and only if the sentence $\psi\leftrightarrow\phi$ is valid.

Why is this true? Consider the definition of logical equivalence. Two sentences are logically equivalent if and only if they are satisfied by the same set of truth assignments. Now recall the semantics of the biconditional operator. Clearly, if two sentences are logically equivalent, they are satisfied by the same truth assignments, and so the corresponding biconditional must be valid. Conversely, if a biconditional is valid, the two component sentences must be satisfied by the same truth assignments, and so they are logically equivalent.

There is a similar connection between logical entailment between two sentences and the validity of the corresponding implication. And there is a natural extension to cases of logical entailment involving finite sets of sentences.

**Deduction Theorem:** A sentence $\phi$ logically entails a sentence $\psi$ if and only if $\phi\rightarrow\psi$ is valid. More generally, a finite set of sentences $\{\phi_1, \phi_2, \dots, \phi_n\}$ logically entails $\phi$ if and only if the compound sentence $\phi_1\land\dots\land\phi_n\rightarrow \phi$ is valid.

If a sentence $\phi$ logically entails a sentence $\psi$, it means that any truth assignment that satisfies $\phi$ also satisfies $\psi$. Looking at the semantics of implications, we see that an implication is true if and only if every truth assignment that makes the antecedent true also makes the consequent true. Consequently, logical entailment holds exactly when the corresponding implication is valid.

There's also a connection between logical entailment and unsatisfiability. In particular, if a set $\Delta$ of sentences logically entails a sentence $\phi$, then $\Delta$ together with the negation of $\phi$ must be unsatisfiable. The reverse is also true.

**Unsatisfiability Theorem:** A set $\Delta$ of sentences logically entails a sentence $\phi$ if and only if the set of sentences $\Delta\cup\{\neg \phi\}$ is unsatisfiable.

An interesting consequence of this result is that we can determine logical entailment by checking for unsatisfiability. This turns out to be useful in various logical proof methods.

Finally, consider the definition of logical consistency. A sentence $\phi$ is logically consistent with a sentence $\psi$ if and only if there is a truth assignment that satisfies both $\phi$ and $\psi$. This is equivalent to saying that the sentence $\phi\land\psi$ is satisfiable.

**Consistency Theorem:** A sentence $\phi$ is logically consistent with a sentence $\psi$ if and only if the sentence $\psi\land\phi$ is satisfiable. More generally, a sentence $\phi$ is logically consistent with a finite set of sentences $\{\phi_1, \dots, \phi_n\}$ if and only if $\left(\phi_1\land\dots\land\phi_n\right)$.

The connections described in the preceding section are useful in solving logical problems because they allow us to transform problems of one type into problems of another type. In thinking about these various connections, the main thing to keep in mind is that logical properties and logical relationships are metalevel. They are things we assert in talking about logical sentences; they are not sentences within our formal language. By contrast, implications, biconditionals, and conjunctions are statements within our formal language; they are not metalevel statements. In a sense, we can implicitly express some logical relationships within our formal language by writing the corresponding biconditionals and implications and conjunctions and checking for the logical properties of these statements.

#Mathematical_Logic 