By writing down premises, instances of axiom schemas, and applying rules of inference, it is possible to derive conclusions that cannot be derived from the premises in a single step. This idea of stringing things together in this way leads to the notion of a direct proof.

**Direct Proof:** A direct proof of a conclusion from a set of premises is a sequence of sentences terminating in the conclusion, in which each item is either (1) a premise, (2) an instance of an axiom schema, or (3) the result of applying a rule of inference to earlier items in the sequence.

**Provability Operator:** Let $R$ be a set of rules of inference. If there exists a proof of a sentence $\phi$ from a set $\Delta$ of premises using the rules of inference in $R$, we say that $\phi$ is provable from $\Delta$ using $R$. We usually write this as $\Delta\vdash_R\phi$, using the provability operator $\vdash$ (which is sometimes called a "single turnstile"). If the set of rules is clear from context, we usually drop the subscript, writing just $\Delta\vdash \phi$.

### Proof Systems

A **Proof System** is a finite set of axiom schemas and rules of inference. In this book, we focus on proof systems with valid axiom schemas and sound rules of inference.

The **Hilbert System** is a well-known proof system for propositional logic. It has one rule of inference, namely **Implication Elimination**, and three axiom schemas: **Implication Creation**, **Implication Distribution**, and **Implication Reversal**.

### Soundness and Completeness

We say that a proof system is **sound** if and only if every provable conclusion is logically entailed. In other words, if $\Delta \vdash \phi$, then $\Delta \vDash \phi$.

We say that a proof system is **complete** if and only if every logically entailed conclusion is provable. In other words, if $\Delta \vDash \phi$, then $\Delta \vdash \phi$.

The Hilbert system is sound and complete for propositional logic. In other words, for this system, logical entailment and provability are identical.

The upshot of this result is significant. On large problems, the proof method often takes fewer steps than the truth table method. Moreover, proofs are usually much smaller than the corresponding truth tables. So writing an argument to convince others does not take as much space. However, in the worst case, the proof method may take just as many or more steps to find an answer as the truth table method.

#Mathematical_Logic 