### Conditional Proofs
*Conditional proofs* are similar to direct proofs in that they are sequences of reasoning steps. However, they differ from direct proofs in that they have more structure. In particular sentences can be grouped into *subproofs* nested within outer *superproofs*.

As an example, consider the conditional proof shown below:

|   |   |   |   |
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|$p\Rightarrow q$||Premise|
|2.|$q\Rightarrow r$||Premise|
|3.|$p$||Assumption|
|4.|$q$||Implication Elimination: 3, 1|
|5.|$r$||Implication Elimination: 4, 2|
|6.|$p\Rightarrow r$||Implication Introduction: 3, 5|

Conditional proofs offer the main advantage of enabling us to prove statements that cannot be established using standard rules of inference alone. Within conditional proofs, we can make assumptions in subproofs, derive conclusions from those assumptions, and then derive implications outside the subproofs, with the assumptions as antecedents and the conclusions as consequents.

The above conditional proof exemplifies this. Starting from line 3, we initiate a subproof with the assumption that "$p$" is true, despite "$p$" not being a premise in the overall problem. Within the subproof, we derive "$q$" from the premise on line 1, and further, we prove "$r$" from "$q$" using the premise on line 2. This concludes the subproof. Finally, from this subproof, we establish "$(p\Rightarrow r)$" in the outer proof. Knowing "$p$," we can prove "$r$," thus justifying "$(p ⇒ r)$." The rule employed in this case is known as *Implication Introduction* or $II$.

As demonstrated in this example, three fundamental operations are involved in creating useful subproofs: 
1. making assumptions, 
2. using standard rules of inference to derive conclusions, and 
3. using conditional rules of inference to derive conclusions outside of subproofs. Each of these operations has its significance in constructing valid proofs.

In a conditional proof, making arbitrary assumptions is permissible within any subproof. The assumptions need not be part of the initial premise set. However, such assumptions cannot be directly used outside of the subproofs; they are only employed as conditions in derived implications, thus not affecting the overall proof or unrelated subproofs.

An ordinary rule of inference is applicable to a particular subproof of a conditional proof only if there exists an instance of the rule where all the premises occur earlier in the subproof or in some superproof of the subproof. Notably, it is not allowed to use sentences from subproofs within that subproof or in other subproofs of its superproofs. However, it is not acceptable to use a sentence from a subproof when applying an ordinary rule of inference in a superproof.

Also note that it is not permissible to use implication elimination as shown here because it uses a concusion from a subproof as a premise in an application of an ordinary rule of inference in its superproof.


|   |   |   |   |
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|$p\Rightarrow q$||Premise|
|2.|$q\Rightarrow r$||Premise|
|3.||$p$|Assumption|
|4.||$q$|Implication Elimination: 3, 1|
|5.||$r$|Implication Elimination: 4, 2|
|6.|$p\Rightarrow r$||Implication Introduction: 3, 5|
|7.|$r$|| Implication Elimination 2,4 **Wrong!**|

The malformed proof shown below is another example. Here, line 8 is illegal because line 4 is not in the current subproof or a superproof of this subproof.

|   |   |   |   |
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|$p\rightarrow q$||Premise|
|2.|$q\rightarrow r$||Premise|
|3.||$p$|Assumption|
|4.||$q$|Implication Elmination: 1, 3|
|5.||$r$|Implication Elmination: 2, 4|
|6.|$p\rightarrow r$||Implication Introduction: 3, 5|
|7.||$\neg r$|Assumption|
|8.||$r$|Implication Elmination: 2, 4 **Wrong!**|
|9.|$\neg r\rightarrow r$||Implication Introduction: 7, 8|

Correctly utilizing results that are derived in subproofs, need  a rule of inference. Like an ordinary rule of inference, a conditional rule of inference is a pattern of reasoning consisting of one or more premises and one or more conclusions. As before, the premises and conclusions can be schemas. However, the premises can also include conditions of the form $\phi\vdash \psi$. The rule in this case is called Implication Introduction, because it allows us to introduce new implications.

$$\begin{equation}
\Sigma\cup\phi\vdash \psi \ \  \text{ iff }  \ \ \Sigma\vdash\phi\rightarrow\psi
\end{equation}
$$
We therefore define *Conditional proof* of a conclusion from a set of premises to be sequence of sentences terminating in an occurrence of the conclusion at the top level of proof. Each step of the proof is either:
1. A premise
2. 2. The result of applying an ordinary or conditional rule of inference to earlier items in the sequence

### Fitch
Fitch is a proof system that is particularly popular in the Logic community. It is as powerful as many other proof systems and is far simpler to use. Fitch achieves this simplicity through its support for conditional proofs and its use of conditional rules of inference in addition to ordinary rules of inference. In general Fitch has ten rules of inference, nine ordinary and one (The Implication Introduction) is a conditional rule of inference.

_And Introduction_ (shown below on the left) allows us to derive a conjunction from its conjuncts. If a proof contains sentences φ1 through φ_n_, then we can infer their conjunction. _And Elimination_ (shown below on the right) allows us to derive conjuncts from a conjunction. If we have the conjunction of φ1 through φ_n_, then we can infer any of the conjuncts.

|And Introduction|
|---|
|φ1|
|...|
|φ_n_|
||   |   |
|φ1 ∧ ... ∧ φ_n_|


|And Elimination|
|---|
|φ1 ∧ ... ∧ φ_n_|
||   |   |
|φ_i_|

_Or Introduction_ allows us to infer an arbitrary disjunction so long as at least one of the disjuncts is already in the proof. _Or Elimination_ is a little more complicated than And Elimination. Since we do not know which of the disjuncts is true, we cannot just drop the ∨. However, if we know that every disjunct entails some sentence, then we can infer that sentence even if we do not know which disjunct is true.

|Or Introduction|
|---|
|φ_i_|
||   |   |
|φ1 ∨ ... ∨ φ_n_|

|Or Elimination|
|---|
|φ1 ∨ ... ∨ φ_n_|
|φ1 ⇒ ψ|
|...|
|φ_n_ ⇒ ψ|
||   |   |
|ψ|


_Negation Introduction_ allows us to derive the negation of a sentence if it leads to a contradiction. If we believe (φ ⇒ ψ) and (φ ⇒ ¬ψ), then we can derive that φ is false. _Negation Elimination_ allows us to delete double negatives.

|Negation Introduction|
|---|
|φ ⇒ _ψ_|
|φ ⇒ ¬_ψ_|
||   |   |
|¬φ|

|Negation Elimination|
|---|
|¬¬φ|
||   |   |
|φ|

_Implication Introduction_ is the conditional rule we saw in section 5.3. If, by assuming φ, we can derive ψ, then we can derive (φ ⇒ ψ). _Implication Elimination_ is the first rule we saw Section 5.2.

|Implication Introduction|
|---|
|φ ⊢ ψ|
||   |   |
|φ ⇒ ψ|

|   |
|---|
|\|Implication Elimination\|<br>\|---\|<br>\|φ ⇒ ψ\|<br>\|φ\|<br>\|   \|   \|<br>\|ψ\||

_Biconditional Introduction_ allows us to deduce a biconditional from an implication and its inverse. _Biconditional Elimination_ goes the other way, allowing us to deduce two implications from a single biconditional.

|Biconditional Introduction|
|---|
|φ ⇒ ψ|
|ψ ⇒ φ|
||   |   |
|φ ⇔ ψ|

|Biconditional Elimination|
|---|
|φ ⇔ ψ|
||   |   |
|φ ⇒ ψ|
|ψ ⇒ φ|

In addition to these rules of inference, it is common to include in Fitch proof editors several additional operations that are of use in constructing Fitch proofs. For example, the Premise operation allows one to add a new premise to a proof. The Reiteration operation allows one to reproduce an earlier conclusion for the purposes of clarity. Finally, the Delete operation allows one to delete unnecessary lines.

#Mathematical_Logic 